text|People may have different arousal needs at different times of the day. For example, in the mornings, some people may need music that can increase their arousal to moderate levels if they tend to be more sleepy or withdrawn in the mornings. Many persons with dementia may also experience restlessness, fearfulness or agitation in the late afternoon or early evening, which can have a number of contributing factors. It can be helpful to introduce music listening prior to the typical onset time of these symptoms.

More specifically, if someone were to usually become agitated at 4pm, music listening could occur from 3:30pm with the intention of offsetting the agitation. In this case it may be that music designed to lower arousal levels will be most useful. For other people, meal times can be the time when music is particularly useful for reducing unsettled behaviour.

If a person typically has trouble sleeping a playlist designed to lower arousal to a sleepinducing level could be very useful. Again, it may be helpful to create several playlists for different times of day for people who may have differing needs throughout a 24 hours period.

It is also important to consider how often the person will benefit from listening to music and for how long. Research indicates that enjoyment of music tends to follow an inverted Ushape as depicted in Figure 2 – enjoyment increases according to how familiar it is to the listener. However, there reaches a point at which the music becomes over-familiar and liking for the music decreases. How often each person will be able to listen to particular music without becoming over-familiar and feeling bored with it will depend on several variables including their current memory functioning. For example, people with significantly impaired short-term memory are less likely to become over-familiar with a particular song even with regular listening. It can be beneficial therefore to monitor and record responses in a music-listening diary for a period of 1-2 weeks in order to determine what that particular person’s saturation point is for certain music.

Figure 2 – Inverted U-shape relationship between familiarity and liking of music|image|relationship_graph|
text|Older adults in general and people with dementia in particular, can be sensitive to noisy environments. The listening situation can be an important factor in whether or not the music listening experience will be a positive one for the individual. Some individuals may find that listening to music with headphones helps to block out noises from the environment that may be disturbing. For others, it may be more useful to listen to music in a quiet place such as their own room.

A diary template is included in Appendix 6. Ideally for those with low saturation points who tend to become bored with listening to the same music rather quickly, it may be best to have several playlists of approximately 30-45 minutes each for each situation in which the music might be used.

For example, 2-3 playlists could be created for mornings, another 2-3 for use during periods of agitation, and another 2-3 for use before sleeping. These can then be rotated as needed so that over-familiarity with the music is less likely to occur.


***Different playlists may be needed to manage different symptoms and at different times of day. Individuals should be monitored to determine the most useful ‘dosage’.***