text|As previously noted, people who have a higher degree of cognitive impairment and/or are experiencing or have a history of psychological difficulties or trauma, are more likely to experience a negative response to music than individuals who do not fall into these categories. However, it seems that these groups of people are still able to experience the benefits of music if appropriate strategies are put into place.

Firstly, extra care should be taken during the music selection phase, to ensure that playlists do not contain music likely to trigger distressing memories and that the music selected does not have musical features such as minor modes that may be more likely to create a negative response. Additionally, it is also important that this group is closely monitored during music listening. This will allow space for adverse reactions to be quickly identified and appropriate support offered, and for playlists to be adjusted so that more helpful music is used in future. Where possible a trained psychologist, geriatric psychiatrist, pastoral care worker, or a nurse or caregiver familiar to the person with dementia should be on hand to offer support in the case of an adverse reaction. Alternatively, caregivers may keep on hand something that has been known to soothe the person with dementia in the past such as a favourite object or activity.

Keeping a diary of songs heard and how the person responded to them such as that provided in Appendix 6 can be a useful strategy. Recording responses can help with identifying particular pieces of music that seem to trigger negative responses as well as music that seems to generally have the desired positive mood effects.

This may be useful regardless of whether the individual has a negative response, since evidence suggests that the number of songs that will have a positive effect on the individual may narrow as cognitive functioning declines. In the early to mid stages of dementia the individual may respond to a wide variety of music, yet as the condition progresses, they may begin to respond to only one or two key songs.

Even when precautions are taken, instances will still arise in which people experience negative reactions when listening to music. This can occur for various reasons, such as the music being attached to a meaningful memory or perhaps triggering negative memories. For example, it is not uncommon for women to sometimes become upset when listening to songs featuring intimate sounding male voices, particularly the ‘crooners’ (e.g. Bing Crosby or Dean Martin), especially where the person may have a history of traumatic or abusive relationships, or may have had a spouse who has passed away. Alternatively, a person may have been in a distressed state prior to listening to music which may be exacerbated while listening to music.

When a negative response does occur, there are several things that can be adapted in an attempt to create a more positive music listening experiences:
1. Time of day. It could be beneficial to try playing music to the person at a different time of day. For example, if music was played at 4pm and the person became distressed, next time music could be played at 11am, to observe if there is a more positive response. As previously noted, there may be certain times of day during which people are typically more agitated, anxious or distressed. If a pattern is identified, it may be useful to use music prior to these periods to avoid the person reaching a state of agitation, anxiety or distress.
2. Music Selection. In some instances, it may be the music selection which is triggering the negative response. The selected music may be triggering negative or traumatic memories. Alternatively, it is also possible that the person simply does not like the music that has been selected. To address this possibility, it is recommended that music listening is attempted again at another time with different songs included on the playlist. However, it is also important to note that a song that upsets a person on one occasion may not do so on other occasions. Therefore, it is recommended that the individual who is facilitating the music listening session use their best judgement about this.
3. The Listening Situation. Some people may become distressed when wearing headphones for music listening. This can be the result of the headphones either being uncomfortable or perhaps causing the person to become confused and subsequently distressed about why they are wearing them. To address this, music can alternatively be played through loudspeakers in a private room. Other situational factors may be the place in which the person is seated while listening or the volume at which the music is being played.

While the benefits of music listening are experienced by many, if a person continues to have a negative response with these measures in place, then it is possible that music may not be the right thing for that person. Regardless, it is always important to have a support system in place for the person, such as ensuring that a familiar person is nearby.

How to Manage Negative Responses to Music|image|how_to_manage