text|Research has demonstrated that music playlists are most effective when the selected music is personally significant to the individual. Studies comparing the use of personalised music with music not specifically based on the preferences of the person consistently indicate that personalised music has better outcomes on mood and behaviour. For example, studies have demonstrated that music not specifically derived from an individuals personal preferences can actually increase their agitation (Nair et al., 2011).

Furthermore, one study found that playing classical music to persons with dementia caused increased agitation, whilst using personalised playlists led to the same person becoming calmer (Ragneskog, Asplund, Kihlgren, & Norberg, 2001). Personalisation of playlists is likely more effective because the music is associated with and can activate memories that may otherwise be lost to the person with dementia. The person can be taken back to a time they were able to interpret and understand, overriding aspects of the present environment that may currently be interpreted as confusing or meaningless.

There are several ways that the preferences of each person can be determined:
• By asking the person themselves
• By asking family, friends and carers
• By playing music to the person and observing their reactions, including at different times of day

When possible, the person for whom the playlist is being created should be the first point of call when gathering information about musical preferences. Initially, it is recommended to ask the person what their favourite songs are or who their favourite musicians are.

Other questions such as asking whether there is a specific genre or era of music they may prefer are also useful at this time. An adapted version of a questionnaire developed by Gerdner and colleagues (Gerdner, Hartsock, & Buckwalter, 2000) can be found in Appendix 3. Notice that these questions focus on finding out not just types of music but specific songs that are personally meaningful to the individual.

Family and friends may be able to supplement this information, and in many cases may be the primary source of information where the person with dementia is no longer able to communicate verbally or is unable to remember specific songs or artists. Appendix 3 also therefore contains a questionnaire for family and friends.  Family members can be asked whether they simply are able to recall any of the musical preferences of the person, such as favourite songs, artists or genres. Similarly, the family member can be asked whether they have access to any CDs, cassette tapes or records that the person owns, as these could be incorporated into the playlist.

This is also an opportunity to ask the family member whether they are aware of any music that the person has reacted negatively to in the past, or perhaps any music that would be associated with any negative or emotionally intense memories for that person.

Where it is difficult to get information either from the person themselves or from family and friends, it is possible to simply play music to the person and observe their reaction. Many times particular songs will spark memories and some personal connection with the music or at the least enjoyment of it will be obvious. For example, the listener may begin to tap along with the music with their hands or feet, or begin to smile. This enjoyment is still very much possible even if the person did not listen to music often in the past. It is recommended that music covering a wide range of genres and time periods be prepared on a portable listening device. This can then be used to play examples of different genres of music to the person.

It may be useful to start with music from the ‘reminiscence bump’. The reminiscence bump is a trend where people have increased recollection and preference for events that occurred during their adolescence and early adulthood. When applied to music preferences, it is therefore most likely that people will show a preference for music that was popular during the period from which they were 15 years old to 30 years old. Appendix 4 contains a list of songs from the 40’s through 70’s that covers a wide range of genres. The genres covered may include classical, rock, popular music, country, folk, jazz and religion specific music.  People not from an English-speaking background may particularly benefit from the use of music specific from the region in which they grew up.


***Music that is personally significant to an individual or from a preferred genre will be more effective for managing moods and behaviour in people with dementia***


If the person being interviewed is limited in their ability to speak or communicate verbally, a positive reaction can also be gauged through body language, such as tapping foot/hand in time with the music, heading nodding, singing, humming, smiling etc.  Negative reactions may be evident from crying, distressed vocalisations or facial expressions, restlessness or shallow breathing, for example. Responses to songs can be rated using a scale developed by Severine Samson (Appendix 5) which categorises the strength of the memories evoked by the music based on various types of reactions (Samson, Dellacherie, & Platel, 2009). A number of songs can be played to the person and songs selected based on the strength of the rating given.