text|In order to determine the person’s vulnerability to negative responses to music, it is important to find out something about their mental health history and/or their current mood symptoms either from the person themselves or from family and friends.

Several screening tools can be used to inform whether a person is considered to fall within a ‘low risk’ or ‘high risk’ category for experiencing a negative response to music. These screening tools involve assessing both a person’s cognitive capacity as well as their psychological wellbeing. The following screening tools are recommended:
1. The Mini Mental Status Exam (MMSE) or any other tool commonly used for assessing cognitive ability
2. The Vulnerability to Negative Affect in Dementia Scale (VNADS) (Appendix 1)

The Mini Mental Status Exam (MMSE) is often used in aged care contexts and can be a useful tool for estimating whether a person is experiencing cognitive impairment. Cognitive impairment refers to a decline in abilities such as memory and thinking skills. This is a 30item questionnaire that takes approximately 5 to 10 minutes to administer. The MMSE does not require any specialised equipment and can be accessed online for free at https://www.ihpa.gov.au/sites/default/files/publications/smmse-tool-v2.pdf.

The highest attainable score is 30, with scores between:
• 25 and 30 suggesting no significant cognitive impairment
• 20 and 25 indicating a mild impairment
• 10 and 20 suggesting a moderate impairment
• 10 and below indicating severe impairment

Deficits in ability may be evident in several domains including memory, attention, language or capacity to follow instructions.

The severity of an person’s cognitive impairment will inform the extent to which a person may have the capacity to have input into the creation of their playlist, the musical qualities that would be most beneficial to prioritise on the playlist, and the level of monitoring the person will require during music listening. People who would be considered low risk include those who have a mild level of cognitive impairment (i.e. a score of 20 or above on the MMSE). At lower levels of cognitive impairment, it is likely that a broader range of music will stimulate a positive response; whereas as at higher levels of cognitive decline, individuals can tend to become responsive to a narrower range of songs.

Additionally, it is also important to evaluate a person’s psychological wellbeing before proceeding to create a musical playlist for them. This should involve briefly screening for indications that a person may be experiencing symptoms or have a history of depression, anxiety, agitation or any other disturbances to psychological wellbeing. This can be achieved by having a short conversation with the person, if they are capable of doing so. Alternatively or additionally, observations from caregivers and family members can also be used.

Alternatively, a structured screening tool called the Vulnerability to Negative Affect in Dementia Scale (VNADS) can be used to identify people who may be at risk of negative responses to music. If the person scores a maximum of 1 item above neutral this would indicate they are 'low risk'; if they score 2 items above neutral they should be considered 'moderate risk', while if they score 3 or more items above neutral they should be considered 'high risk'.

The screening tool can be used in one of two forms: one for use with the person with dementia themselves, and one for use by family and friends. The version of the scale for use with the person with dementia is best administered by asking the questions to the person verbally, while the Family version can be completed on paper.

Based on these two screening tools, a person would be categorised as ‘high-risk’ if they have a score below 10 on the MMSE or rated 3 or more items above neutral on the VNADS. Scores between 10-20 on the MMSE and/or 2 items rated above neutral on VNADS would define that person as being ‘moderate risk’. People with scores of 20 or above on the MMSE and a maximum of 1 item above neutral on the VNADS can be considered ‘low risk’ (see Table 1).

Table 1 – Risk Categories Based on Scores on Screening Tools:|image|risk_cat_table|


text|***Screening tools can be used to determine whether persons with dementia are at risk for negative responses to music***