text|Musical features can also have an impact on a person’s experience when listening to music. The tempo (speed) and mode (key) of a piece of music can have an impact on the emotional response of the individual and are detailed below. However, it should be noted that this information is intended as a general guideline only. It is possible to use music that falls outside these guidelines for most people and still have positive mood effects especially if the music has some personal significance to them. Care should be taken particularly in the case of people who have been identified as vulnerable.

Tempo refers to the speed or the pace of a piece of music and is typically measured by the number of beats per minute (BPM). Research has demonstrated that when music is played to older adults at a slow to moderate tempo (e.g. Louis Armstrong’s What A Wonderful World), it will result in greater interest than music that is of a fast tempo (e.g. Connie Francis singing Everybody’s Somebody’s Fool) (Garrido, Stevens, Chang, Dunne, & Perz, 2019). In fact, it has been found that when music with a fast tempo is played, it can increase arousal (or alertness) in a way that is unpleasant and perhaps over-stimulating. Music played at a fast tempo can be particularly overwhelming for people with high levels of arousal, such as those who are already agitated.

Therefore, it is generally preferable to pick something with a slow to moderate tempo to ensure the listener remains engaged without becoming overwhelmed.

While it is possible to simply estimate whether or not a piece of music is slow, fast or moderate in speed without determining the exact BPM, in rough terms, a tempo can be regarded as slow if it is less than about 80 BPM, fast if it is greater than about 120 BPM, and moderate if it falls in between. If unsure, there are several ways that you can determine the BPM of a piece of music:
• Count the beats in the music per minute as you would when taking a heart rate or pulse.
• Another way to do this is to clap along with the music for one minute and count how many claps you do during this time.
• Use an online metronome
• Search online for the usual tempo the piece is performed at

BPM in music can be measured in much the same way you would take a heart rate or pulse. Firstly, just tap your fingers or your foot in time to the music. Then count how many taps you do in the space of one minute. Alternatively, it is possible to use an online metronome to give you the estimate. Figure 3 shows an online metronome found at https://www.8notes.com/metronome/. To use this metronome simply tap 4 times on the space bar at the same speed of the music. Other online metronomes can be found at https://www.metronomeonline.com/ and http://a.bestmetronome.com.

Figure 3 – Online metronome for determining BPM in music|image|metronome|
text|Alternatively, the BPM of many songs can be found by simply typing the name of the song + tempo into a search engine. Figure 4 shows the result of a Google search for the song “What a Wonderful World” sung by Louis Armstrong.

Figure 4 – Screenshot of a Google search for song tempo|image|tempo_search|
text|Mode refers to the key in which a piece of music has been written. In most music in Western cultures the mode is usually minor (typically associated with ‘sadness’ or negative emotions) or major (typically associated with happy, positive emotions). It is important to recognise that this is independent of tempo.  That is, a slow piece of music is not necessarily in a minor key, nor is faster piece of music always in a major key. It has been found that music in a minor key tends to increase experiences of negative emotions in people with dementia (Garrido et al., 2019). While it may not be necessary to avoid music in minor keys for all people with dementia, it is particularly advisable for people who have been identified as having a vulnerability to negative responses.

Determining the mode of a piece of music is not always easy even for the musically trained. However there are some simple methods that can be used:
• Search online for the key the music is usually played in
• Search online for the sheet music or score

Finding the key of a piece of music can easily be found for many songs by simply entering the name of the song plus the word “key” into the search engine.

Another way to determine the key of the piece is to search online for the sheet music or score by entering the name of the song and the words “score” or “sheet music”.  Figure 5 shows the results of such a search. Underneath the title “Images for what a wonderful world score”, Figure 5 also shows several pieces of sheet music for this song.

Figure 5 – Example of a Google search for an online score|image|online_score_search|
text|Clicking on the first image in the search results makes the sheet music in Figure 4 come up.

Figure 6 – Sheet music for “What A Wonderful World”|image|sheet_music_wonderful_world|
text|Above the music at the word “trees” in Figure 6 a “F” can be seen. A small letter “m” is used to indicate a minor key. Thus, when a capital letter is found at the very beginning or very end of the music without the letter “m” this usually signifies that the music is in a major key or mode. For example, the song ‘What a Wonderful World’ is in the key F major.

Figure 7 shows the song “Sometimes I Feel Like A Motherless Child”. In this example, a capital “F” with a small letter “m” is seen at both the beginning and end of the song, signifying that the piece is in a minor key.

Figure 7 – Sheet music for “Sometimes I Fell Like A Motherless Child”|image|sheet_music_motherless_child|


text|***Music in slow to moderate tempos and in major keys tends to have more positive effects on the mood of people with dementia***

