text|While music has been identified as a valuable tool for improving mood and reducing behavioural disturbances, it is important to recognise that music will not always result in an improved mood. Each person will respond differently when listening to music, and in some instances people may become distressed or upset during music listening. Emotions such as sadness are not always detrimental. In fact, they can provide useful opportunities for people to release negative emotions or to reflect on and process life situations (Garrido, 2017). However, research has shown that people with a history of depression or anxiety may find it more difficult to recover from negative emotions, and such people may thus be vulnerable to undesirable after-effects from listening to music (Garrido, Bangert, & Schubert, 2016). In addition, some studies have found that some people with dementia may experience increased agitation as a result of listening to music (Nair et al., 2011; Park & Specht, 2009).

Negative reactions are substantially more common within groups that have been identified as being vulnerable. In this context, vulnerability refers to factors from a person’s personal history, deficits in cognitive functioning or struggles with mental health that increase susceptibility to undesirable reactions. People with a history of or currently diagnosed depression are more prone to experiencing sudden negative mood shifts when listening to music (Garrido & Schubert, 2015). Similarly, people with a higher degree of cognitive impairment are more prone to experiencing negative reactions.

People with a history of trauma or abuse are also particularly susceptible to the triggering of distressing memories if music is not carefully selected.

It is important that individual reactions are taken into consideration and appropriate measures taken to minimise or manage undesirable reactions within vulnerable populations. This section will discuss identification of such individuals, see Chapter 6 pp. 2022 for specific information regarding the monitoring and management of adverse responses.


***People with a history or current symptoms of depression can be more vulnerable to undesirable outcomes from listening to music***
